---
title: 'Effective Writing -- 18 Specific Ways to Improve Writing'
date: 2024-11-23
permalink: /posts/2024/11/write/
tags:
  - tutorials
---

After delving into the book "Style: The Basics of Clarity and Grace," I distilled its essence into several key items (just like my once-favorite technical series, "Effective C++"). I hope this can help readers to hone their writing skills with these insights.

- [Part I: Clarity](#part-i-clarity)
  - [Item 1: Make Important Actions Verbs](#item-1-make-important-actions-verbs)
  - [Item 2: Get Characters into Subjects](#item-2-get-characters-into-subjects)
  - [Item 3: Reconstruct Absent Characters](#item-3-reconstruct-absent-characters)
  - [Item 4: Use Abstractions as Characters Carefully](#item-4-use-abstractions-as-characters-carefully)
  - [Item 6: Choose Between Active and Passive](#item-6-choose-between-active-and-passive)
  - [Item 7: Break Long Compound Noun Phrase](#item-7-break-long-compound-noun-phrase)
  - [Item 8: Get to the Subject Quickly](#item-8-get-to-the-subject-quickly)
  - [Item 9: Get to the Verb and Object Quickly](#item-9-get-to-the-verb-and-object-quickly)
- [Part II: Cohesion and Coherence](#part-ii-cohesion-and-coherence)
  - [Item 10: Put Old Information Before New Information](#item-10-put-old-information-before-new-information)
  - [Item 11: Understand Coherence](#item-11-understand-coherence)
  - [Item 12: Avoid Distractions at the Beginning of a Sentence](#item-12-avoid-distractions-at-the-beginning-of-a-sentence)
  - [Item 13: Put Complexity to the End of Sentences.](#item-13-put-complexity-to-the-end-of-sentences)
  - [Item 14: Emphasize with Stress](#item-14-emphasize-with-stress)
  - [Item 15: Start Section with Key Themes](#item-15-start-section-with-key-themes)
- [Part III: Concision](#part-iii-concision)
  - [Item 16: Delete, Replace - Refine Sentences](#item-16-delete-replace---refine-sentences)
  - [Item 17: Remove Redundant Metadiscourse](#item-17-remove-redundant-metadiscourse)
  - [Item 18: Don't Stack Phrases or Clauses in Long Sentences](#item-18-dont-stack-phrases-or-clauses-in-long-sentences)
- [Part IV: How-to Tutorials](#part-iv-how-to-tutorials)
  - [Guide 1: Introduction](#guide-1-introduction)
  - [Guide 2: Conclusion](#guide-2-conclusion)

<style>
  .check-li {
    list-style-image: url('data:image/svg+xml,%3Csvg xmlns=%22http://www.w3.org/2000/svg%22 width=%2216%22 height=%2216%22%3E%3Ctext x=%220%22 y=%2215%22 font-size=%2216%22 font-weight=%22bold%22 fill=%22black%22%3E%E2%9C%93%3C/text%3E%3C/svg%3E');
  }

  .align-table {
    border-collapse: collapse;
    width: 75%; 
    margin-left: auto; 
    margin-right: auto;
    font-size: 0.9em;
    border: none;
  }

  .align-table td {
    border: none;
    text-align: center;
  }

  .exercise {
    border: 1px solid #ccc; 
    padding: 12px; 
    background-color: #f9f9f9;
  }

</style>

## Item 0: Draft Without Perfection
Although I have summarized a series of principles below, please do not treat these principles as rules to be imposed on every sentence as you draft it, but as guidelines to help you identify sentences that are likely to cause your readers trouble and then to revise them.

If you get bogged down in the details, you will never finish your first draft. Most experienced writers get something down as fast as they can. Then, as they revise that first draft into something clearer, they understand their ideas better. And when they understand their ideas better, they express them more clearly, and the more clearly they express them, the better they understand them—and so it goes, until they run out of energy, interest, or time.

# Part I: Clarity
## Item 1: Make Important Actions Verbs
Consider the following two sentences:

<ol type="a">
<li> Once upon a time, as a <u><b>walk</b></u> through the woods was taking place on the part of <i>Little Red Riding Hood</i>, the <i>Wolf</i>'s <b><u>jump</u></b> out from behind a tree occurred, causing her <b>fright</b>.</li>

<li> Once upon a time, <u><i>Little Red Riding Hood</i></u> was <b>walking</b> through the woods, when the <u><i>Wolf</i></u> <b>jumped</b> out from behind a tree and <b>frightened</b> her.</li>
</ol>

Sentence (a) seems verbose and indirect. The two main characters (italicized), *Little Red Riding Hood* and the *Wolf*, are not subjects (underlined), and their actions (boldfaced) —<b>walk</b>, <b>jump</b>, and <b>fright</b>—are presented as nouns rather than verbs. In sentence (b), the more direct sentence, those two main characters are subjects and their actions are verbs. That's why we prefer (b).

Let's revise a different sentence as an example:
<ul>
The outsourcing of high-tech work to Asia by corporations means the loss of jobs for many American workers.
</ul>

**Step 1: Identify the main characters and their corresponding actions.**
<ul>
The <u><b>outsourcing</b></u> of high-tech work to Asia by <i>corporations</i> means the <u><b>loss</b></u> of jobs for many <i>American workers</i>.
</ul>

**Step 2: Convert nominalizations into verbs.** Assign the characters as subjects and rewrite the sentence using subordinating conjunctions such as *because*, *if*, *when*, *although*, *why*, *how*, *whether*, or *that*.
<ul>
Many <i><u>American workers</u></i> are <b>losing</b> their jobs because <i><u>corporations</u></i> are <b>outsourcing</b> their high-tech work to Asia.
</ul>

<div class="exercise">
<b>Exercise: Spot and revise nominalizations.</b>
<br/>
<ol>
<li> 
The intention of the committee is to audit the records.
</li>
<details>
<summary><b>Hint</b></summary>
The nominalization "intention" is the subject of an empty verb such as <i>be</i>, <i>seems</i>, or <i>has</i>.
Replace the nominalization with a verb and find a character that would serve as the subject of that verb.
</details>
<details>
<summary><b>Answer</b></summary>
The <i><u>committee</u></i> <b>intends</b> to audit the records.
</details>
<li> 
The agency conducted an investigation into the matter.
</li>
<details>
<summary><b>Hint</b></summary>
The nominalization "investigation" follows the empty verb "conducted". 
Change the nominalization to a verb and replace the empty verb with the new verb.
</details>
<details>
<summary><b>Answer</b></summary>
The <i><u>agency</u></i> <b>investigated</b> the matter.
</details>
<li>
Our loss in sales was a result of their expansion of outlets.
</li>
<details>
<summary><b>Hint</b></summary>
This sentence contains two nominalizations: "loss" and "expansion", both followed by empty verbs. Convert these nominalizations into verbs and identify the characters who should serve as the subjects.
</details>
<details>
<summary><b>Answer</b></summary>
<i><u>We</u></i> <b>lost</b> sales because <i><u>they</u></i> <b>expanded</b> their outlets.
</details>
<li>
There is no need for our further study of this problem.
</li>
<details>
<summary><b>Hint</b></summary>
A nominalization follows "<i>there be</i>". Replace the nominalization with a verb and identify the character that should serve as the subject of that verb.
</details>
<details>
<summary><b>Answer</b></summary>
<i><u>We</u></i> <b>need</b> not <b>study</b> this problem further.
</details>
<li>
We did a review of the evolution of the brain.
</li>
<details>
<summary><b>Hint</b></summary>
This sentence contains two nominalizations: "review" and "evolution". Turn the first nominalization into a verb. For the second, you can leave it as is or turn it into a verb in a clause beginning with <i>how</i> or <i>why</i>.
</details>
<details>
<summary><b>Answer</b></summary>
<i><u>We</u></i> <b>reviewed</b> the <b>evolution</b> of the <i>brain</i>. <br>
<i><u>We</u></i> <b>reviewed</b> how the <i><u>brain</u></i> <b>evolved</b>.
</details>
</ol>
</div>

## Item 2: Get Characters into Subjects
Consider following three sentences:
<ol>
<li>The <i><u>CIA</u></i> <b>feared</b> the <i><u>president</u></i> would <b>recommend</b> to <i>Congress</i> that <i><u>it</u></i> <b>reduce</b> <i>its</i> budget. </li>
<li> The <u><b>fear</b></u> of the <i>CIA</i> was that a <u><b>recommendation</b></u> from the <i>president</i> 
to <i>Congress</i> would be for a <b>reduction</b> in <i>its</i> budget. </li>
<li> <u>There</u> was <b>fear</b> that <u>there</u> would be a <b>recommendation</b> for a budget <b>reduction</b>.</li>
</ol>
Most readers think (a) is clearer than (b) and (c).
In (b), the two simple subjects (underlined) are not concrete 
characters but abstractions. Even worse, in (c), characters are deleted entirely, which may be ambiguous for readers.

Let's revise a different sentence as an example:
<ul>
Governmental intervention in fast-changing technologies has led to 
the distortion of market evolution and interference in new product 
development.
</ul>

**Step 1: Find the main characters.** They may be possessive pronouns 
attached to nominalizations, objects of prepositions (particularly *by* and *of*), or only implied. 
<ul>
<i>Governmental</i> intervention in fast-changing technologies has led to 
the distortion of <i>market</i> evolution and interference in new product 
development.
</ul>

**Step 2: Skim the passage for actions involving those characters**, 
particularly actions buried in nominalizations. Ask Who is doing what?

<table class="align-table">
    <tr>
        <td><i>governmental</i> <b>intervention</b></td>
        <td>&#8594;</td>
        <td><i>government</i> <b>intervenes</b></td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td><b>distortion</b></td>
        <td>&#8594;</td>
        <td><i>[government]</i> <b>distorts</b></td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td><i>market</i> <b>evolution</b></td>
        <td>&#8594;</td>
        <td><i>markets</i> <b>evolve</b></td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td><b>interference</b></td>
        <td>&#8594;</td>
        <td><i>[government]</i> <b>interferes</b></td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td><b>development</b></td>
        <td>&#8594;</td>
        <td><i>[market]</i> <b>develops</b></td>
    </tr>
</table>

**Step 3: Revise.** Reassemble those new subjects and verbs into a sentence, using conjunctions such as *if*, *although*, *because*, *when*, *how*, and *why*.
<ul>
<li class="check-li">
When a <i>government</i> <b>intervenes</b> in fast-changing technologies, <i>it</i> <b>distorts</b> how <i>markets</i> <b>evolve</b> and <b>interferes</b> with their ability to <b>develop</b> new products.
</li>
</ul>

<div class="exercise">
<b>Exercise: Identify main characters, actions involving those characters, and revise.</b>
<br/>
<ol>
<li> 
Medieval theological debates often addressed issues considered trivial 
by modern philosophical thought.
</li>
<details>
<summary><b>Hint</b></summary>
<strong>Step 1: Find the main characters.</strong>  
The sentence contains two main characters: "Medieval theological debates" and "issues". The former is an abstraction. Replace this abstraction with concrete characters, such as "Medieval theologians."
<br/><br/>

<strong>Step 2: Identify actions involving those characters.</strong><br/>  
<table class="align-table">
    <tr>
        <td><i>Medieval theological</i> <b>debates</b></td>
        <td>&#8594;</td>
        <td><i>Medieval theologians</i> <b>debate</b></td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td><i>issues</i> <b>considered</b></td>
        <td>&#8594;</td>
        <td><i>[philosophers]</i> <b>consider</b> <i>issues</i></td>
    </tr>
</table>

<strong>Step 3: Reassemble the sentence.</strong>
Turn nominalizations into verbs and reconstruct the sentence by directly linking the characters with their actions. Use conjunctions if needed (e.g., <i>that</i>, <i>which</i>).
</details>
<details>
<summary><b>Answer</b></summary>
<i>Medieval theologians</i> often <b>debated</b> <i>issues</i> that modern <i>philosophers</i> <b>consider</b> trivial. 
</details>
</ol>
</div>

## Item 3: Reconstruct Absent Characters
Readers have the biggest problem with sentences devoid of all 
characters:
<ul>
A decision was made in favor of doing a study of the disagreements.
</ul>
That sentence could mean either of these, and more:
<ul style="list-style-type: none;">
 <li>We decided that I should study why they disagreed.</li>
 <li>I decided that you should study why he disagreed.</li>
</ul>
The writer may know who is doing what, but readers may not and 
so usually need help.

Sometimes we omit characters to make a general statement:
<ul>
<span title="This can't be a sentence a human can write.">Research strategies that look for more than one variable are of more 
use in understanding factors in psychiatric disorder than strategies 
based on the assumption that the presence of psychopathology is dependent on a single gene or on strategies in which only one biological 
variable is studied.</span>
</ul>

But when we try to revise that into something clearer, we have to 
invent characters, then decide what to call them. Do we use *one* or 
*we*, or name a generic "doer"?
<ul>
<li class="check-li"> If <i>one/we/you/researchers</i> are to understand what causes psychiatric 
disorder, <i>one/we/you/they</i> should use research strategies that look for 
more than one variable rather than assume that a single gene is responsible for psychopathology or adopt a strategy in which <i>one/we/you/they</i> study only one biological variable.
 </li>
</ul>
To most of us, *one* feels stiff, but *we* may be ambiguous because 
it can refer just to the writer, to the writer and others but not the 
reader, to the reader and writer but not others, or to everyone. 
And if you are not directly naming your reader, you is usually inappropriate. Directly naming your reader means explicitly identifying who *you* refers to, such as "students", "researchers", or "practitioners", rather than leaving it to the reader to guess whether *you* refers to them personally or to a broader audience.

In long sentence, explicitly adding characters can avoid ambiguity in pronoun reference. Compare:
<ol type="a">
<li>Teachers should remember that students are vulnerable and uncer
tain about those everyday ego-bruising moments that adults ignore 
and that <b>they</b> do not understand that one day they will become as 
confident and as secure as the adults that bruise them.</li>
<li>Teachers should try to remember that <b>students</b> are vulnerable to 
ego-bruising moments that adults ignore and that <b>students</b> do not 
understand that ...</li>
</ol>

In (a), we hesitate about what boldfaced "they" refers to. While in (b), we repeat a noun to avoid such an ambiguous pronoun.

In general, opt for the most specific character you can find when your sentences are missing characters.

## Item 4: Use Abstractions as Characters Carefully
Sometimes, abstractions can serve as characters, but only when used carefully. Consider this example:

<ul>
To understand what causes psychiatric disorder, <i>studies</i> should look for more than one variable rather than adopt a strategy in which they test only one biological variable or assume that a single gene is responsible for psychopathology.
</ul>

Here, *studies* is an abstraction turned into a virtual character because it performs clear actions: *look*, *adopt*, *test*, and *assume*. Most readers are familiar with the concept of "studies", so this sentence is both clear and easy to follow.

But using abstractions as characters can also create problems. When your audience isn't familiar with an abstract term—or when you surround it with other abstractions—your writing can quickly become dense and hard to follow. In the following example (actions are boldfaced; human characters are italicized):

<ul style="list-style-type: none;">
<li>The <b>argument</b> is this. The cognitive component of <b>intention</b> exhibits 
a high degree of <b>complexity</b>. <b>Intention</b> is temporally <b>divisible</b> into 
two: prospective <b>intention</b> and immediate <b>intention</b>. The cognitive 
function of prospective <b>intention</b> is the <b>representation</b> of a <i>subject's</i> 
similar past <b>actions</b>, his current situation, and his course of future 
actions. That is, the cognitive component of prospective <b>intention</b> is 
a <b>plan</b>. The cognitive function of immediate <b>intention</b> is the <b>monitoring</b> and <b>guidance</b> of ongoing bodily <b>movement</b>.</li>
</ul>

We can make that passage clearer if we tell its story from the 
point of view of flesh-and-blood characters:
<ul>
<li class="check-li">
<i>I</i> <b>argue</b> this about <b>intention</b>. It has a complex cognitive component of two temporal kinds: prospective and immediate. <i>We</i> <b>use</b> prospective <b>intention</b> to <b>represent</b> how <i>we</i> have <b>acted</b> in our past and present and how <i>we</i> will act in the future. That is, <i>we</i> <b>use</b> the cognitive component of prospective <b>intention</b> to <b>help</b> <i>us</i> <b>plan</b>. <i>We</i> <b>use</b> immediate <b>intention</b> to <b>monitor</b> and <b>guide</b> <i>our</i> bodies as <i>we</i> <b>move</b> them.
</li>
</ul>

By introducing human characters (*I* and *we*), this version clarifies who is doing what and makes the explanation easier to follow.

## Item 6: Choose Between Active and Passive
Basically active voice is better, but in the following cases, the passive is often the better choice:
<ol>
<li><b>You don't know who did an action, readers don't care, or you don't want them to know.</b><br/>

Often, we don't say who does an action, because we don't 
know or readers won't care. For example, we naturally choose 
the passive in these sentences:
<ul>
<li>The president <b>was rumored</b> to have considered resigning.</li>
<li>Those who <b>are found</b> guilty can be fined.</li>
<li>Valuable records should always <b>be kept</b> in a safe.</li>
</ul>
If we do not know who spread rumors, we cannot say. And no 
one doubts who finds people guilty, fines them, or should keep 
records safe, so we don't have to say. 
</li>
<li><b>You want to shift a long bundle of information to the end of a sentence, especially when doing so lets you begin with a shorter chunk of more familiar information.</b><br/>

A sentence confuses us when it opens with information that is unexpected. For example, in this next passage, the subject of the second sentence gives us new and complex information (boldfaced), before we read familiar information that we recall from the previous sentence (italicized).
<ul>
We must decide whether to improve education in the sciences alone or to raise the level of education across the whole  
curriculum. <b>The weight given to industrial competitiveness as opposed to the value we attach to the liberal arts</b> will determine <i>our decision</i>.
</ul>
But If we use the passive, the short, familiar information (our decision) would be put first, the order we prefer:
<ul>
<li class="check-li">
We must decide whether to improve education in the sciences alone or raise the level of education across the whole curriculum. <i>Our decision</i> will be determined <b>by the weight we give to industrial competitiveness as opposed to the value we attach to the liberal arts</b>.
</li>
</ul>
</li>
<li>
<b>You want your readers to focus on a particular character.</b>
Consider this paragraph, it reports the end of World War II in Europe from the point of view of the Allies:
<ul>
  By early 1945, the Allies had essentially <b>defeated</b> Germany; all that remained was a bloody climax. American, French, British, and Russian forces <b>had breached</b> its borders and <b>were bombing</b> it around the clock. But they had not yet so <b>devastated</b> Germany as to destroy its ability to resist.
</ul>

If you want to express it from the point of view of Germany, you can use passive verbs to make Germany the subject/character.
<ul>
<li class="check-li">
  By early 1945, Germany had essentially <b>been defeated</b>; all that remained was a bloody climax. Its borders had <b>been breached</b>, and it was <b>being bombed</b> around the clock. It had not <b>been so devastated</b>, however, that it could not resist.
</li>
</ul>
</li>
</ol>

## Item 7: Break Long Compound Noun Phrase
Strings of nouns feel lumpy, so avoid them, especially ones you invent. Revise compound nouns of your own invention, especially when they include nominalizations. Just reverse the order of words and find prepositions to connect them:
<table class="align-table">
  <tr>
    <td>1</td>
    <td>2</td>
    <td>3</td>
    <td>4</td>
    <td>5</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>early</td>
    <td>childhood</td>
    <td>thought</td>
    <td>disorder</td>
    <td>misdiagnosis</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>misdiagnose</td>
    <td>disordered</td>
    <td>thought</td>
    <td>in early</td>
    <td>childhood</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>5</td>
    <td>4</td>
    <td>3</td>
    <td>1</td>
    <td>2</td>
  </tr>
</table>

Reassembled, it looks like this:
<ul>
Physicians misdiagnose<sup>5</sup> disordered<sup>4</sup> thought<sup>3</sup> in young<sup>1</sup> children<sup>2</sup> because they are unfamiliar with recent literature on the subject.
</ul>
If, however, a long compound noun includes a technical term in your field, keep that part of the compound and unpack the rest:
<ul>
<li class="check-li">
Physicians misdiagnose<sup>5</sup> <b>thought disorders</b><sup>3,4</sup> in young<sup>1</sup> children<sup>2</sup> because they are unfamiliar with recent literature on the subject.
</li>
</ul>

## Item 8: Get to the Subject Quickly
Avoid 
beginning more than a few sentences with long introductory 
phrases and clauses. Compare following sentences:
<ol type="a">
<li><b>Since most undergraduate students change their major fields 
of study at least once during their college careers</b>, <u>first-year students</u> who are not certain about the program of studies they want to 
pursue <i>should not load up</i> their schedules to meet requirements for 
a particular program.
</li>
<li><b><u>First-year students</u> <i>should not load up</i></b> their schedules with 
requirements for a particular program if they are not certain 
about the program of studies they want to pursue, because 
most change their major fields at least once during their college 
careers.</li>
</ol>

In (a), we have to read and 
understand seventeen words before reaching the main subject and 
verb. In (b), we get past the subject and verb of the first clause in 
just six words. 

Opening with a 
subordinate clause sometimes is inevitable, but when you find it's too long, 
try moving it to the end. If it doesn't fit there, try making it an independent sentence.

## Item 9: Get to the Verb and Object Quickly
Readers 
also want to get past a sentence's main subject to its verb and 
object. Therefore, you should make sure:
<ol>
<li><b>Avoid long, abstract subjects.</b> As we discussed in Item 4, if you find a long subject (longer than seven or eight words) that 
includes a nominalization, try turning the nominalization into a 
verb and finding a subject for it:
<ul>
<li style="list-style-type: none;"><u>Abco Inc.'s <i>understanding</i> of the drivers of its profitability in the 
Asian market for small electronics</u> helped it pursue opportunities 
in Africa.</li>
<li class="check-li"><u>Abco Inc.</u> was able to pursue opportunities in Africa because it 
<i>understood</i> what drove profitability in the Asian market for small 
electronics.</li>
</ul>
A subject can also be long if it includes a long relative clause. In this case, try turning the relative clause into an introductory subordinate 
clause beginning with <i>when</i> or <i>if</i>:
<ol type="a">
<li>A company <b>that focuses on hiring the best personnel and then 
trains them not just for the work they are hired to do but for 
higher-level jobs</b> is likely to earn the loyalty of its employees.</li>
<li><b>When a company focuses on hiring the best personnel and then 
trains them not just for the work they are hired to do but for 
higher-level jobs</b>, it is likely to earn the loyalty of its employees.</li>
</ol>
But if the introductory clause turns out to be as long as that one, 
try moving it to the end of its sentence:
<ul>
<li class="check-li">A company is likely to earn the loyalty of its employees <b>when it 
focuses on hiring the best personnel and then trains them not 
just for the work they are hired to do but for higher-level jobs</b>.</li>
</ul>
Or better yet, make it an independent sentence.
<ul>
<li class="check-li">Some companies focus on hiring the best personnel and then train 
them not just for the work they are hired to do but for higher-level 
jobs. <b>Such companies are likely to earn the loyalty of their 
employees</b>.
</li>
</ul>
</li>
<li><b>Avoid interrupting the subject–verb connection.</b> You frustrate 
readers when you interrupt the connection between a subject and 
verb:
<ul>
Some scientists, <b>because they write in a style that is impersonal 
and objective</b>, do not easily communicate with lay people.
</ul>
The <i>becuase</i> clause breaks subject and verb. Move 
the interruption to the beginning or end of its sentence, depending 
on whether it connects more closely to what precedes or follows it:
<ul>
<li class="check-li">Since some scientists write in a style that is impersonal and objective, 
they do <b>not easily communicate with laypeople. This lack of communication</b> damages ...</li>
<li class="check-li">Some scientists do not easily communicate with laypeople because 
they write in <b>a style that is impersonal and objective. It is a kind 
of style</b> filled with passives and ...</li>
</ul>
</li>
<li><b>Avoid interrupting the verb–object connection.</b>
Similarly, if the connection between verb and object is interruupted, Move the interrupting element to the beginning or end of its sentence:
<ul>
<li style="list-style-type: none;">We must develop, <b>if we are to become competitive with other 
companies in our region</b>, a core of knowledge regarding the state of 
the art in effective industrial organizations.</li>
<li class="check-li"><b>If we are to compete with other companies in our region</b>, we 
must develop a core of knowledge about the state of the art in effec
tive industrial organizations. Such organizations provide ...</li>
<li class="check-li">We must develop a core of knowledge about the state of the art in 
effective industrial organizations <b>if we are to compete with other 
companies in our region</b>. Increasing competition ...</li>
</ul>
An exception: when a prepositional phrase you can move is 
shorter than a long object, try putting the phrase between the verb 
and object:
<ul>
<li style="list-style-type: none;"> In a long sentence, put the newest and most important information 
that you want your reader to remember <b>at its end</b>.</li>
<li class="check-li">In a long sentence, put <b>at its end</b> the newest and most important 
information that you want your reader to remember.</li>
</ul>
</li>
</ol>

# Part II: Cohesion and Coherence
## Item 10: Put Old Information Before New Information
Sentences are cohesive when the last few words of one set up information that appears in the first 
few words of the next. That's what gives us our experience 
of flow. And in fact, that's the biggest reason the passive is 
in the language: to let us arrange sentences so that they flow 
from one to the next easily. Consider:
<ol type="a">
<li>Some astonishing questions about the nature of the universe have 
been raised by scientists studying black holes in space. <b>The collapse 
of a dead star into a point perhaps no larger than a marble 
creates a black hole</b>. So much matter compressed into so little vol
ume changes the fabric of space around it in puzzling ways. </li>
<li>Some astonishing questions about the nature of the universe have 
been raised by scientists studying black holes in space. <b>A black 
hole is created by the collapse of a dead star into a point perhaps  
no larger than a marble.</b> So much matter compressed into so little 
volume changes the fabric of space around it in puzzling ways.</li>
</ol>

In context, our sense of "flow" calls not for (a), the sentence with 
the active verb, but for (b), the one with the passive.

The reason is clear: the last four words of the first sentence 
introduce an important character—*black holes in space*. But with 
sentence (a), the next concepts we hit are *collapsed stars* and 
*marbles*, information that seems to come out of nowhere.

Therefore, please remember to **put old information before new information**.
This item and the Items introduced in Part I often complement one another. 
But if you have to choose, favor this one. The way you
organize old and new information determines how cohesive
readers will find your writing. And for readers, a passage's
overall cohesion trumps the clarity of individual sentences.

## Item 11: Understand Coherence
Cohesion is a sense of flow, while coherence is a sense of the whole. A paragraph can be cohesive but incoherent:
<ul>
Consistent ideas toward the beginnings of sentences help readers 
understand what a passage is generally about. A sense of coherence 
arises when a sequence of topics comprises a narrow set of related 
ideas. But the context of each sentence is lost by seemingly random 
shifts of topics. Unfocused paragraphs result when that happens.
</ul>
This paragraph feels choppy, out of focus, even disorganized, due to following reasons:

1. The subjects of the sentences are entirely unrelated.
2. The sentences share no common themes or ideas.
3. The paragraph has no one sentence that states what the whole passage is about.

Let's revise it step by step:

**Step 1: Diagnose.** Underline the first few words of every sentence and clause in 
a passage, stopping if you hit the main verb. 
<ul>
<u>Consistent ideas toward the beginnings of sentences</u> help readers 
understand <u>what a passage</u> is generally about. <u>A sense of coherence</u> 
arises when <u>a sequence of topics</u> comprises a narrow set of related 
ideas. <u>But the context of each sentence</u> is lost by seemingly random 
shifts of topics. <u>Unfocused, even disorganized paragraphs</u> result when that happens.
</ul>

**Step 2: Analyze.** Do the underlined words constitute a relatively small set 
of related ideas? Even if you see how they are related, will 
your readers? Do the underlined words name the most important characters, 
real or abstract? For that passage, the answers of these questions are no.

**Step 3: Rewrite.** In most (not necessarily all) of your sentences, use subjects 
to name their topics. Be sure that those topics are, in context, familiar to your 
readers.
<ul>
<li class="check-li">
<b>Readers</b> understand what a passage is generally about when <b>they</b> 
see consistent ideas toward the beginnings of sentences. 
<b>They</b> feel a passage is coherent when <b>they</b> read a 
sequence of topics that focuses on a narrow set of related ideas. But 
when <b>topics</b> seem to shift randomly, <b>readers</b> lose the context of each 
sentence. When <b>that</b> happens, <b>they</b> feel they are reading paragraphs 
that are unfocused and even disorganized.
</li>
</ul>

Now the subjects form a strong topic string: *readers, they, they, 
they, topics, readers, that, they [readers]*.

## Item 12: Avoid Distractions at the Beginning of a Sentence
Readers want to get to a subject/topic quickly, but too often we begin sentences
with metadiscourse such as *fortunately*, *perhaps*, *allegedly*, *it is important to note*, *for the most part*, or *politically 
speaking*. For example:
<ul> 
And, therefore, it is important to note that, in Eastern states since 
1980, <i>acid rain</i> has become a serious problem.
</ul>
When you open several sentences with distractions like that, 
your readers have a hard time seeing not just what each 
sentence is about, but the focus of a whole passage. When 
you find a sentence with lots of words before its subject/topic, 
revise:
<ul>
Since 1980, therefore, <i>acid rain</i> has become a political  problem in 
the Eastern states.
</ul>

## Item 13: Put Complexity to the End of Sentences.
Your readers want you to organize your 
sentences to help them manage two kinds of difficulty:
- long and complex phrases and clauses
- new information, particularly unfamiliar technical terms

### Complex Grammar
The following two sentences show how to arrage complex grammar:
<ol type="a">
<li> <u>Lincoln's claim that the Civil War was God's punishment of both 
North and South for slavery</u> appears in the last part of the speech.</li> 
<li> In the last part of his speech, <u>Lincoln</u> claims that God gave the 
Civil War to both North and South as a punishment for slavery.</li>
</ol>
Most readers prefer (b), because it begins simply with a short 
introductory phrase followed by a one-word subject and a specific 
verb, then moves toward grammatical complexity.

### Complex Meaning
Another kind of complexity is in the meanings of words, especially 
technical terms. Compare these two passages:
<ol type="a">
<li>The role of <b>calcium blockers</b> in the control of <b>cardiac irregularity</b> 
can be seen through an understanding of the role of calcium in the 
activation of muscle cells. The <b>proteins actin, myosin, tropomyosin, 
and troponin</b> make up the <b>sarcomere</b>, the basic unit of muscle con
traction. The <b>energy-producing</b>, or <b>ATPase</b>, <b>protein</b> myosin makes up 
its thick filament, while the <b>regulatory proteins actin</b>, tropomyosin, 
and troponin make up its thin filament. <b>Interaction of myosin and 
actin</b> triggers muscle contraction.</li>
<li>When a muscle contracts, it uses <b>calcium</b>. We must therefore 
understand how calcium affects muscle cells to understand how <b>cardiac irregularity</b> is controlled by the drugs called <b>calcium blockers</b>. 
The basic unit of muscle contraction is the <b>sarcomere</b>. It has two 
filaments, one thin and one thick. Those filaments consist of four 
proteins that regulate contraction: <b>actin, tropomyosin, and troponin</b> in the thin filament and <b>myosin</b> in the thick one. 
Muscles contract when the <b>regulatory protein actin</b> in the thin filament interacts 
with myosin, an <b>energy-producing or ATPase protein</b> in the thick 
filament. </li>
</ol>
Both passages use the same technical terms (boldfaced), but (b) is clearer to 
those who know nothing about the chemistry of muscles. This is because
almost all the technical terms in (a) are toward the 
beginnings of their sentences and the familiar ones are toward 
the end.

In general, your sentences should begin with elements that 
are relatively short: a short introductory phrase or clause, 
followed by a short, concrete subject, followed by a verb 
expressing a specific action. The general principle is to carry the reader not from complexity to simplicity, but from simplicity to complexity.

## Item 14: Emphasize with Stress
The last few words of a sentence are important, because we tend to emphasize them. We have the same experience when reading silently.
If you end a sentence on words 
that carry little meaning, your sentence will seem to end weakly:
<ul>
<li style="list-style-type: none;"> Global warming could raise sea levels to a point where much of the 
world's low-lying coastal areas would disappear, <b>according to most atmospheric scientists</b>.
</li>
<li class="check-li"> According to most atmospheric scientists, global warming could 
raise sea levels to a point where much of the world's low-lying coastal areas <b>would disappear</b>.
</li>
</ul>

You can revise a sentence to emphasize 
particular words that you want readers to hear stressed and 
thereby note as particularly significant. Here are how to revise.

### Three Tactical Revisions
<ol style="padding-left: 1em;">
  <li><b>Trim the end.</b>
    <ul>
      <li style="list-style-type: none;"> Sociobiologists claim that our genes control our social behavior <b>in 
        the way we act in situations we are in every day.</b> </li>
      <li class="check-li"> Sociobiologists claim that our genes control our <b>social behavior.</b> </li>
    </ul>
    Since <i>social behavior</i> means <i>the way we act in situations</i>, we drop everything after behavior.
  </li>
  <li><b>Shift peripheral ideas to the left.</b>
    <ul>
      <li style="list-style-type: none;"> The data offered to prove ESP are weak, <b>for the most part.</b>  </li>
      <li class="check-li"> <b>For the most part</b>, the data offered to prove ESP are weak. </li>
    </ul>
  </li>
  <li><b>Shift new information to the right.</b>
    <ul>
      <li style="list-style-type: none;"> <b>Questions about the ethics of withdrawing intravenous 
        feeding</b> are more difficult [than something just mentioned]. </li>
      <li class="check-li"> More difficult [than something just mentioned] are <b>questions about the ethics of withdrawing intravenous feeding</b>. </li>
    </ul>
  </li>
</ol>

### Five Syntactic Devices to Emphasize the Right Words
<ol style="padding-left: 1em;">
  <li><b>There shift.</b> You can begin a paragraph with <i>there be</i> 
    to introduce new topics and concepts that they develop in 
    what follows. Compare:
    <ul>
      <li style="list-style-type: none;"> <b>Several syntactic devices</b> let you manage where in a sentence 
        you locate units of new information. </li>
      <li class="check-li"> There are <b>several syntactic devices</b> that let you manage where in 
        a sentence you locate units of new information. </li>
    </ul>
  </li>
  <li><b>Passives.</b> A passive verb lets you flip a 
    subject and object, which sometimes enable us to get old and new information in the right order.
    <ul>
      <li style="list-style-type: none;"> Some claim that <b>our genes</b> influence aspects of behavior that 
        we think are learned. <b>Our genes</b>, for example, seem to determine ... </li>
      <li class="check-li"> Some claim that aspects of behavior that we think are learned are 
        in fact influenced <b>by our genes</b>. <b>Our genes</b>, for example, seem to determine ... </li>
    </ul>
  </li>
  <li><b>What shift.</b>
    <ul>
      <li style="list-style-type: none;"> We need a monetary policy that would end fluctuations in money supply, unemployment, and inflation. </li>
      <li class="check-li"> <b>What</b> we need <b>is</b> a monetary policy that would end fluctuations in money supply, unemployment, and inflation. </li>
    </ul>
  </li>
  <li><b>It shift.</b> When you have a subject consisting of a long noun clause, you can move it to the end of the sentence and start with an <i>it</i>:
    <ul>
      <li style="list-style-type: none;"> <b>That oil prices would be set by OPEC</b> once seemed inevitable. </li>
      <li class="check-li"> It once seemed inevitable <b>that oil prices would be set by OPEC</b>. </li>
    </ul>
  </li>
  <li><b>Not only X, but (also) Y (as well).</b> In this pair, note how 
    the but emphasizes the last element of the pair:
    <ul>
      <li style="list-style-type: none;">We must clarify these issues <b>and develop deeper trust</b>.</li>
      <li class="check-li">We must <i>not only</i> clarify these issues <i>but also</i> <b>develop deeper trust</b>.</li>
    </ul>
    Unless you have reason to emphasize the negative, end with 
    the positive:
    <ul>
      <li style="list-style-type: none;">The point is to highlight our success, <b>not to emphasize our 
        failures</b>.</li>
      <li class="check-li">The point is not to emphasize our failures, but <b>to highlight our 
        success</b>.</li>
    </ul>
  </li>
</ol>

### Three Ways to End a Sentence with Special Emphasis
<ol style="padding-left: 1em;">
  <li>
    <b>End with a strong word, or better, a pair of them.</b>
    At the end of  
a sentence, prepositions feel light. Adjectives and adverbs are heavier than prepositions but lighter 
than verbs or nouns, the heaviest of which are nominalizations. Compare:
    <ul>
      <li style="list-style-type: none;">Studies into intellectual differences among races are projects that 
only the most politically naive psychologist would be willing to <b>give 
support to</b>. </li>
      <li class="check-li"> Studies into intellectual differences among races are projects that 
only the most politically naive psychologist would be willing to 
<b>support</b>. </li>
    </ul>
  </li>
  <li><b>End with a prepositional phrase introduced by <i>of</i>.</b> The former is flat:
  <ul>
    <li style="list-style-type: none;">
     In the second century ad, the Roman Empire comprehended <b>the 
earth's fairest, most civilized part</b>. Ancient renown and disciplined 
valour guarded <b>its extensive frontiers</b>. The gentle but powerful in
fluence of laws and manners had gradually <b>unified the provinces</b>. 
Their peaceful inhabitants enjoyed and abused luxurious wealth 
while decently preserving what seemed to be <b>a free constitution</b>. 
Appearing to possess the sovereign authority, the Roman senate de
volved on the emperors all <b>executive governmental powers</b>.
    </li>
    <li class="check-li">
    In the second century of the Christian era, the Empire of Rome com
prehended <b>the fairest part <i>of</i> the earth</b>, and <b>the most civilized 
portion <i>of</i> mankind</b>. The frontiers of that extensive monarchy were 
guarded <b>by ancient renown</b> AND <b>disciplined valour</b>. The gentle, but 
powerful influence of laws and manners had gradually cemented <b>the 
union <i>of</i> the provinces</b>. Their peaceful inhabitants <b>enjoyed</b> AND 
<b>abused the advantages <i>of</i> wealth</b> AND <b>luxury</b>. The image of a free 
constitution was preserved with decent <b>reverence</b>. The Roman sen
ate appeared to possess the sovereign authority, and devolved on the 
emperors all <b>the executive powers <i>of</i> government</b>.
    </li>
  </ul>
  </li>
  <li>
    <span title="This is toooooo difficult.">
    <b>End with an echoing salience.</b> At the end of a sentence, readers feel special emphasis when a stressed word or phrase balances the sound or meaning of an earlier one.
    <ul>
    <li class="check-li">
    I have written these essays to anatomize this familiar yet really 
strange being, <b>style the centaur</b>; the book may be read as an ex
tended critical commentary on Buffon's famous saying that the <b>style 
is the man</b>.
    </li>
    <li class="check-li">
    Apart from a few mechanical tricks of rhetoric, <b>manner</b> is indissolubly linked to <b>matter</b>; <b>style shapes</b>, and in turn is <b>shaped</b> by, 
<b>substance</b>.
    </li>
    </ul>
    </span>
  </li>
</ol>

## Item 15: Start Section with Key Themes
To write a document that readers will 
think is coherent, open every section, subsection, and the 
whole with a short, easily grasped introductory segment. At 
the end of that opening segment, put a sentence that states 
both the point of the unit and the key themes that follow. 
Such point sentences constitute the outline of your document, its logical structure. If readers miss them, they may 
judge your writing to be incoherent. For example, read this:
<ul>
Thirty sixth-grade students wrote essays that were analyzed to 
determine the effectiveness of eight weeks of training to distinguish 
fact from opinion. That ability is an important aspect of making sound 
arguments of any kind. In an essay written before instruction began, 
the writers failed almost completely to distinguish fact from opinion. 
In an essay written after four weeks of instruction, the students visibly 
attempted to distinguish fact from opinion, but did so inconsistently. 
In three more essays, they distinguished fact from opinion more consistently, but never achieved the predicted level of performance. In a 
final essay written six months after instruction ended, they did no better than they did in their preinstruction essays. Their training had some 
effect on their writing during the instruction period, but it was inconsistent, and six months after instruction it had no measurable effect.
</ul>
In this paragraph, the first few sentences introduce the rest, but we don't see in 
them the key concepts that follow: *inconsistently*, *never achieved*, *no better*, *no measurable effect*. Those terms are crucial to the point 
of the whole and help organize the rest. Worse, until the end, when we learn what we need to know to make sense of it retrospectively. But that takes more effort than we should have to expand.

Now, let's compare:
<ul>
<li class="check-li">
In this study, thirty sixth-grade students were taught to 
distinguish fact from opinion. <u>They did so successfully during the 
instruction period, but the <b>effect was inconsistent and less than predicted</b>, and six months after instruction ended, the instruction had <b>no 
measurable effect</b></u>. In an essay written before instruction began, the 
writers failed almost completely to distinguish fact from opinion. In 
an essay written after four weeks of instruction, the students visibly 
attempted to distinguish fact from opinion, but did so inconsistently. 
In three more essays, they distinguished fact from opinion more consistently, but never achieved the predicted level of performance. In 
a final essay written six months after instruction ended, they did no 
better than they did in their preinstruction essay. We thus conclude 
that short-term training to distinguish fact from opinion has no consistent or long-term effect.
</li>
</ul>
This time, we quickly grasp that the first two sentences introduce what follows. And in the second sentence, we see two things: both the point of the passage (underlined) and its key terms (boldfaced). Consequently, we feel the passage hangs together better and we 
read it with more understanding.

Keep in mind this principle: put the point sentence at the end 
of the short opening segment; make it the last sentence that your 
reader reads before starting the longer, more complex segment 
that follows.

# Part III: Concision
## Item 16: Delete, Replace - Refine Sentences
Here are six suggestions to refine your sentences and make them more concise:
<ol style="padding-left: 1em;">
<li><b>Delete meaningless words.</b> Some words are verbal tics that 
we use as unconsciously:

<table class="align-table">
  <tr>
    <td>kind of</td>
    <td>virtually</td>
    <td>actually</td>
    <td>individual</td>
    <td>particular</td>
    <td>really</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>basically</td>
    <td>certain</td>
    <td>various</td>
    <td>generally</td>
    <td>given</td>
    <td>practically</td>
  </tr>
</table>
<ul>
<li style="list-style-type: none;"> Productivity <b>actually</b> depends on <b>certain</b> factors that <b>basically</b> 
involve psychology more than <b>any particular</b> technology. </li>
<li class="check-li"> Productivity depends on psychology more than on technology.
</li>
</ul>
</li>
<li><b>Delete doubled words.</b> Most paired words today are just redundant. Among the common ones:
<table class="align-table" style="width: 80%;">
  <tr>
    <td>full and complete</td>
    <td>true and accurate</td>
    <td>hope and desire</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>hope and trust</td>
    <td>each and every</td>
    <td>first and foremost</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>any and all</td>
    <td>basic and fundamental</td>
    <td>various and sundry</td>
  </tr>
</table>
</li>
<li><b>Delete what readers can infer.</b> Here are three cases:
<ul>
<li><b><i>Redundant Modifiers</i></b> Often, the meaning of a word 
(italicized)  implies its modifier (boldfaced):
<ul>
<li style="list-style-type: none;">Do not try to <i>predict</i> those <b>future</b> events that will <b>completely</b> <i>revolutionize</i> society, because <b>past</b> <i>history</i> shows that it is the 
<b>final</b> <i>outcome</i> of minor events that <b>unexpectedly</b> <i>surprises</i> us 
more.</li>
<li class="check-li">Do not try to <i>predict</i> <i>revolutionary</i> events, because <i>history</i> 
shows that the <i>outcome</i> of minor events <i>surprises</i> us more.</li>
</ul>
Some common redundancies:
<table class="align-table" style="width: 80%;">
  <tr>
    <td>terrible tragedy</td>
    <td>basic fundamentals</td>
    <td>final outcome</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>various different</td>
    <td>future plans</td>
    <td>true facts</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>free gift</td>
    <td>each individual</td>
    <td>consensus of opinion</td>
  </tr>
</table>
</li>
<li> <b><i>Redundant Categories</i></b> Every word implies its  general cate
gory, so cut a word that names it (boldfaced):
<ul>
<li style="list-style-type: none;">During that <i>period</i> <b>of time</b>, the <i>membrane</i> <b>area</b> became <i>pink</i> <b>in 
color</b> and <i>shiny</i> <b>in appearance</b>.</li>
<li class="check-li">During that <i>period</i>, the <i>membrane</i> became <i>pink</i> and <i>shiny</i>.</li>
</ul>
In doing that, you may have to change an adjective into an 
adverb:
<ul>
<li style="list-style-type: none;">The holes must be aligned in an <i>accurate</i> <b>manner</b>.</li>
<li class="check-li">The holes must be aligned <i>accurately</i>.</li>
</ul>
Sometimes you change an adjective into a noun:
<ul>
<li style="list-style-type: none;"> The county manages the <i>educational</i> <b>system</b> and <i>public 
recreational</i> <b>activities</b>.</li>
<li class="check-li">The county manages <i>education</i> and <i>public recreation</i>.</li>
</ul>
Here are some general nouns (boldfaced) often used redundantly:
<table class="align-table" style="width: 90%;">
  <tr>
    <td>large in <b>size</b></td>
    <td>unusual in <b>nature</b></td>
    <td>of a bright <b>color</b></td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>round in <b>shape</b></td>
    <td>of a strange <b>type</b></td>
    <td>at an early <b>time</b></td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>honest in <b>character</b></td>
    <td><b>area</b> of mathematics</td>
    <td>in a confused <b>state</b></td>
  </tr>
</table>

</li>
</ul>
</li>
<li><b>Replace a phrase with a word.</b>
Sometimes you change an adjective into a noun:
<ul>
<li style="list-style-type: none;"> As you carefully read what you have written to improve wording 
and catch errors of spelling and punctuation, the thing to do before 
anything else is to see whether you can use sequences of subjects 
and verbs instead of the same ideas expressed in nouns.</li>
<li class="check-li">As you edit, first replace nominalizations with clauses.</li>
</ul>
Here compressed five phrases into five words:
<table class="align-table">
    <tr>
        <td>carefully read what you have written</td>
        <td>&#8594;</td>
        <td>edit</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td>the thing to do before anything else</td>
        <td>&#8594;</td>
        <td>first</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td>use X instead of Y</td>
        <td>&#8594;</td>
        <td>replace</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td>nouns instead of verbs</td>
        <td>&#8594;</td>
        <td>nominalizations</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td>sequences of subjects and verbs </td>
        <td>&#8594;</td>
        <td>clauses</td>
    </tr>
</table>

<div class="exercise">
<b>Exercise: Replace those long phrases with fewer words. If necessary, turn a nominalization into a
verb </b> 
<br/>
<ol>
<li> 
We must explain the reason for the delay in the meeting.
</li>
<details>
<summary><b>Hint</b></summary>
We must explain <b>the reason for</b> the <i>delay</i> in the meeting.
</details>
<details>
<summary><b>Answer</b></summary>
We must explain <b>why</b> the meeting <i>is delayed</i>.
</details>

<li> 
Despite the fact that the data were checked, errors occurred.
</li>
<details>
<summary><b>Hint</b></summary>
<b>Despite the fact that</b> the data were checked, errors occurred.
</details>
<details>
<summary><b>Answer</b></summary>
<b>Even though</b> the data were checked, errors occurred.
</details>

<li>
In the event that you finish early, contact this office.
</li>
<details>
<summary><b>Hint</b></summary>
<b>In the event that</b> you finish early, contact this office.
</details>
<details>
<summary><b>Answer</b></summary>
<b>If</b> you finish early, contact this office.
</details>

<li>
In a situation where a class closes, you may petition to get in.
</li>
<details>
<summary><b>Hint</b></summary>
<b>In a situation where</b> a class closes, you may petition to get in.
</details>
<details>
<summary><b>Answer</b></summary>
<b>When</b> a class closes, you may petition to get in.
</details>

<li>
I want to say a few words concerning the matter of money.
</li>
<details>
<summary><b>Hint</b></summary>
I want to say a few words <b>concerning the matter of</b> money.
</details>
<details>
<summary><b>Answer</b></summary>
I want to say a few words <b>about</b> money.
</details>

<li>
There is a need for more careful inspection of all welds.
</li>
<details>
<summary><b>Hint</b></summary>
<b>There is a need for</b> more careful <i>inspection</i> of all welds.
</details>
<details>
<summary><b>Answer</b></summary>
You <b>must</b> <i>inspect</i> all welds more carefully.
</details>

<li>
We are in a position to make you an offer.
</li>
<details>
<summary><b>Hint</b></summary>
We <b>are in a position to</b> make you an offer.
</details>
<details>
<summary><b>Answer</b></summary>
We <b>can</b> make you an offer.
</details>

<li>
It is possible that nothing will come of this.
</li>
<details>
<summary><b>Hint</b></summary>
<b>It is possible that</b> nothing will come of this.
</details>
<details>
<summary><b>Answer</b></summary>
Nothing <b>may </b>come of this.
</details>

<li>
Prior to the end of the training, apply for your license.
</li>
<details>
<summary><b>Hint</b></summary>
<b>Prior to</b> the <i>end</i> of the training, apply for your license.
</details>
<details>
<summary><b>Answer</b></summary>
<b>Before</b> training <i>ends</i>, apply for your license.
</details>

<li>
We have noted a decrease/increase in the number of errors.
</li>
<details>
<summary><b>Hint</b></summary>
We have noted a <b>decrease/increase in</b> the number of errors.
</details>
<details>
<summary><b>Answer</b></summary>
We have noted <b>fewer/more</b> errors.
</details>
</ol>
</div>
</li>
<li><b>Change negatives to affirmatives.</b> When you express an 
idea in a negative form, not only must you use an extra word: 
<i>same</i> &#8594; <i>not different</i>, but you also force readers to do a kind of 
algebraic calculation. Of couse, if you want to emphasize the negative, you can keep the negative form.<br/>
Some verbs, prepositions, and conjunctions are implicitly 
negative:
<table class="align-table">
  <tr>
    <td style="text-align: left;"><b>Verbs</b></td>
    <td style="text-align: left;"><i>preclude, prevent, lack, fail, doubt, reject, avoid, deny, refuse, exclude, contradict, prohibit, bar</i></td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td style="text-align: left;"><b>Prepositions</b></td>
    <td style="text-align: left;"><i>without, against, lacking, but for, except</i></td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td style="text-align: left;"><b>Conjunctions</b></td>
    <td style="text-align: left;"><i>unless, except when</i></td>
  </tr>
</table>
Compare these:
<ul>
<li style="list-style-type: none;"><b>Except</b> when you have <b>failed</b> to submit applications <b>without</b> 
documentation, benefits will <b>not</b> be <b>denied</b>.</li>
<li class="check-li">You will receive benefits only if you submit your documents.</li>
</ul>
And you baffle readers completely when you  combine 
explicitly and implicitly negative words with passives and 
nominalizations:
<ul>
<li style="list-style-type: none;">There should be <b>no</b> submission of payments <b>without</b> notification 
of this office, <b>unless</b> the payment does <b>not</b> exceed $100.</li>
<li style="list-style-type: none;">Do not <b>submit</b> payments if you have not <b>notified</b> this office, un
less you are <b>paying</b> less than $100.</li>
<li class="check-li">If you pay more than $100, notify this office first.</li>
</ul>
</li>
<li><b>Delete adjectives and adverbs.</b> Try deleting every adverb and every adjective before a noun, then restore only those 
that readers need to understand the passage.
</li>
</ol>

## Item 17: Remove Redundant Metadiscourse 
You may need some metadiscourse in every
thing you write, but too much metadiscourse will bury your ideas. You can usually cut these two types:
<ol>
<li><b>Metadiscourse that attributes your ideas to a source.</b> Don't announce that something has been <i>observed, noticed, 
noted</i>, and so on; just state the fact:
<ul>
<li style="list-style-type: none;">High divorce rates <b>have been observed</b> to occur in areas that 
<b>have been determined</b> to have low population density.</li>
<li class="check-li">High divorce rates occur in areas with low population density.</li>
</ul>
</li>
<li><b>Metadiscourse that announces your topic.</b> Don't announce that something has been <i>observed, noticed, 
noted</i>, and so on; just state the fact:
<ul>
<li style="list-style-type: none;"><b>This section introduces another</b> problem, that of noise 
pollution. <b>The first thing to say about it is</b> that noise pol
lution exists not only ...</li>
<li class="check-li"><b>Another</b> problem is noise pollution. <b>First</b>, it exists not only ...</li>
</ul>
</li>
</ol>

## Item 18: Don't Stack Phrases or Clauses in Long Sentences
In a long sentence, too many subordinate clauses can cause the structure to sprawl. You can revise in four ways:
### 1. Cut
Try reducing some of the relative clauses to phrases by deleting *who/that/which* + *is/was*:
<ul>
<li class="check-li">
Of the many areas of science important to our future, few are more 
promising than genetic engineering, <del>which is</del> a new way of manipu
lating the elemental structural units of life itself, <del>which are</del> the genes 
and chromosomes that tell our cells how to reproduce to become the 
parts that constitute our bodies.
</li>
</ul>
Occasionally, you can rewrite the remaining verb into an <i>-ing</i> form:
<ul>
<li style="list-style-type: none;"> The day is coming when we will all have numbers <b>that will identify</b> 
our financial transactions so that the IRS can monitor all activities 
<b>that involve</b> economic exchange.</li>
<li class="check-li"> The day is coming when we will all have numbers <del>that will</del> 
<b>identifying</b> our financial transactions so <del>that</del> the IRS can monitor all 
activities that <b>involving</b> economic exchange. </li>
</ul>

### 2. Turn subordinate clauses into independent sentences
### 3. Change clauses to modifying phrases
You can write a long sentence but still avoid sprawl if you change 
relative clauses to one of three kinds of modifying phrases:

**Resumptive Modifiers** &emsp; These two examples contrast a relative 
clause and a resumptive modifier:
<ul>
<li style="list-style-type: none;"> Since mature writers often use resumptive modifiers to extend a line 
of thought, we need a word to name what I have not done in this sen
tence, <b>which I could have ended at that comma but extended to 
show you a relative clause attached to a noun</b>.</li>
<li class="check-li"> Since mature writers often use resumptive modifiers to extend a line 
of thought, we need a word to name what I am about to do in this 
sentence, <b>a sentence that I could have ended at that comma but 
extended to show you how resumptive modifiers work</b>.</li>
</ul>
The boldface resumptive modifier repeats a key word, <i>sentence</i>, and 
rolls on. To create a resumptive modifier, find a key noun before 
the clause, repeat the noun, 
and continue with a restrictive relative clause beginning with <i>that</i>.

You can also resume with an adjective or verb. In that case, just repeat the adjective or verb and continue.
<ul>
<li class="check-li">It was American writers who found a voice that was both <b>true</b> and 
<b>lyrical</b>,
 <b>true</b> to the rhythms of the working man's speech and <b>lyrical</b> in its 
celebration of his labor.</li>
<li class="check-li">Teachers should try <b>to remember</b> that students are vulnerable to ego-bruising moments that adults ignore, <b>to remember</b> that they do not 
understand that ...</li>
</ul>

Occasionally, you can create a resumptive modifier with the 
phrase *one that*:
<ul>
<li class="check-li">I now address a problem we have wholly ignored, <b>one that</b> has 
plagued societies that sell their natural resources to benefit a few 
today rather than using them to develop new resources that benefit 
everyone tomorrow.</li>
</ul>

**Summative Modifiers** &emsp; Here are two sentences that contrast 
relative clauses and summative modifiers:
<ul>
<li style="list-style-type: none;"> Economic changes have reduced Russian population growth to less 
than zero, <b>which will have serious social implications</b>.</li>
<li class="check-li"> Economic changes have reduced Russian population growth to less 
than zero, <b>a demographic event that will have serious social 
implications</b>.</li>
</ul>

To create a summative modifier, end a grammatically complete 
segment of a sentence with a comma, add a term that sums up the 
substance of the sentence so far, and then continue with a restric
tive relative clause beginning with *that*. A summative modifier has the same effect as a resumptive 
modifier: it lets you bring a clause to a sense of closure, then begin 
afresh.

**Free Modifiers** &emsp; Free modifiers can appear at the beginning or end of a sentence, commenting on the subject of the closest verb. It can begin with an -ing present participle or a past participle verb:
<ul>
<li class="check-li"> Free modifiers resemble resumptive and summative modifiers, 
<b>letting you</b> [i.e., the free modifier lets you] <b>extend the line of a 
sentence while avoiding a train of ungainly phrases and clauses</b>.</li>
<li class="check-li"> Leonardo da Vinci was a man of powerful intellect, 
<b>driven by</b> [i.e., Leonardo was driven by] <b>an insatiable curiosity
 and
 haunted by a vision of artistic perfection</b>.</li>
 <li class="check-li"><b>Driven by an insatiable curiosity</b>, Leonardo da Vinci was ...</li>
</ul>
A free modifier can also begin with an adjective:
<ul>
<li class="check-li"> In 1939, we began to assist the British against Germany,
 <b>aware</b> [i.e., we were aware] <b>that we faced another world war</b>.</li>
 <li class="check-li"><b>Aware that we faced another world war</b>, in 1939 we began ...</li>
</ul>

### 4. Coordinate
Coordination is the foundation of a gracefully shaped sentence.
Here are some principles to guide you in achieving good coordination:
<ul>
<li><b>Order the elements from shorter to longer, from simpler 
to more complex.</b><br/>
Consider:
<ul>
We should devote a few final words to a matter that reaches beyond 
the techniques of research to the connections between those sub
jective values that reflect our deepest ethical choices and objective 
research.
</ul>
This sentence seems to end too abruptly with <i>objective research</i>. Structurally, it looks like：
$$
\dots \text{between}
\left\{
  \begin{aligned}
  &\text{those subjective values that reflect our} \\
  &\text{deepest ethical choices} \\
  &\qquad \qquad \qquad\text{and} \\
  &\text{objective research}
  \end{aligned}
\right\}
$$
We can move the shorter to longer by reversing the two elements:
<ul>
<li class="check-li">
We should devote a few final words to a matter that reaches 
beyond the techniques of research to the connections 
between  objective  research and those subjective values that 
reflect our  deepest ethical choices.
</li>
</ul>
Structurally, it looks like:
$$
\dots \text{between}
\left\{
  \begin{aligned}
  &\text{objective research} \\
  &\qquad \qquad \text{and} \\
  &\text{those subjective values that reflect our} \\
  &\text{deepest ethical choices}
  \end{aligned}
\right\}
$$
</li>
<li>
<b>Coordinate elements only of the same grammatical structure.</b><br/>
When you coordinate different grammatical structures, readers may feel you have created a lack of parallelism:
$$
\begin{aligned}
&\text{The committee} \\
&\text{recommends}
\end{aligned}
\left\{
  \begin{aligned}
  & \textbf{revising the curriculum } \text{to recognize} \\
  & \text{trends in local employment} \\
  &\qquad \qquad \qquad \qquad \text{and} \\
  & \textbf{that the division be reorganized } \text{to} \\
  &\text{reflect the new curriculum}
  \end{aligned}
\right\}
$$
It should be:
$$
\checkmark \dots \text{ recommends}
\left\{
  \begin{aligned}
  & \textbf{that the curriculum be revised}  \\
  & \text{to recognize ...} \\
  &\qquad \qquad \qquad \quad \text{and} \\
  & \textbf{that the division be reorganized } \\
  &\text{to reflect}
  \end{aligned}
\right\}
$$
You can also coordinate a noun phrases with <i>how</i> clauses:
$$
\checkmark \text{ We will attempt to delineate}
\left\{
  \begin{aligned}
  & \textbf{the problems } \text{ of education}  \\
  & \text{in developing nations} \\
  &\qquad \qquad \qquad  \text{and} \\
  & \textbf{how coordinated efforts can 
} \\
  & \textbf{address } \text{them in 
economical ways}
  \end{aligned}
\right\}
$$
</li>
<li><b>Avoid ambiguous modifiers.</b><br/>
If a modifier is placed in an inappropriate position, it may cause ambiguity:
<ul>
Overtaxing oneself in physical activity <b>too frequently</b> results in injury.
</ul>

Here, <i>too frequently</i> can modify both <i>overtaxing</i> and <i>injuries</i>. We can make 
its meaning unambiguous by moving <i>too frequently</i>:
<ul>
<li class="check-li">Overtaxing oneself <b>too frequently</b> in physical activity results in 
injury.</li>
<li class="check-li">Overtaxing oneself in physical activity results <b>too frequently</b> in 
injury.</li>
</ul>
<div class="exercise">
<b>Exercise: Make the sentence unambiguous </b> 
<br/>
<ol>
<li> 
Scientists have learned that their observations are as subjective as 
those in any other field in recent years.
</li>
<details>
<summary><b>Hint</b></summary>
The phrase "in recent years" could modify either "have learned" (implying when scientists realized this) or "observation" (implying the observations, which were made in recent years, are as subjective as those in other fields).
</details>
<details>
<summary><b>Answer</b></summary>
Modify "have learned": <b>In recent years,</b> scientists have learned that ... <br/>
Modify "observation": Scientists have learned that <b>in recent years</b> their ...
</details>
</ol>
</div>
</li>
</ul>



# Part IV: How-to Tutorials
## Guide 1: Introduction
Most introductions have three parts: shared context, problem, solution/main point/claim.
Such a structure helps the introduction attract readers' interest and make them willing to read it carefully.
### Establishing a Shared Context
A shared context is the first part of an introduction that connects with the audience by referencing commonly understood facts, beliefs, historical events, or shared experiences. This context serves to ground the discussion, reminding readers of what they already know or are likely to accept, before introducing new or contrasting ideas. 

In writing, shared context can take various forms:
- **Historical background**: Referencing longstanding practices or trends.
- **Recent events**: Highlighting current data or incidents.
- **Common beliefs**: Pointing to widely held assumptions.

It is a rhetorical strategy that motivates readers to engage further, often by setting up a seemingly unproblematic premise that will later be challenged or qualified. 

Here are examples of shared context:
<ul style="list-style-type: none;">
<li><b>Historical background:</b>  Alcohol has been a big part of college life for hundreds of years. 
From football weekends to fraternity parties, college students drink 
and often drink hard. <b>BUT</b>  a new kind of drinking known 
as "binge." ... </li>
<li><b>Recent event:</b> A recent State University survey showed that 80% of first
year students engaged in underage drinking in their first month on 
campus, a fact that should surprise no one. <b>BUT</b> what is 
worrisome is the spread among first-year students of a new kind of drinking known as "binge." ... </li>
<li><b>Common belief:</b> Most students believe that college is a safe place to drink for 
those who live on or near campus. And for the most part they are right. <b>BUT</b> for those students who get caught up in the new trend of "binge" drinking, ... </li>
</ul>

Not every piece of writing opens with this move. Some jump 
to the second element of an introduction: the statement of a 
problem.

### Stating the Problem
A problem must have two parts: a) the *condition* identifies the situation or issue that exists. b) The *cost* explains why the condition matters by identifying its consequences or negative outcomes. This provides motivation for addressing the problem.

You can identify the cost of a problem if you imagine someone 
asking "So what?" after you state its condition:
<ul style="list-style-type: none;">
<li>But a kind of drinking known as "binge" drinking is spreading 
through our colleges and universities. Bingers drink quickly not to 
be sociable but to get drunk or even to pass out.
<span style="opacity:0.5;">So what?</span>
<b>Bingeing is far from the harmless fun long associated with 
college life. In the last six months, it has been cited in at least six 
deaths, many injuries, and considerable destruction of property. It crosses the line from fun to reckless behavior that kills and 
injures not just drinkers but those around them.</b>
</li>
</ul>

There are two kinds of problems: *practical* and *conceptual*.
Practical problems concern real-world conditions that cause tangible harm or costs. Readers are motivated to address practical problems because the costs affect them, prompting questions like "What should we do?" 
You must be upfront about how this costs will affect your readers, even though they may seem obvious, but you cannot count on readers to see the problem as you do.

A conceptual problem has the same two parts as a practical one, a condition and its costs. The condition of a conceptual problem is always something 
that we do not know or understand. The cost of a conceptual problem is not a physical loss, which is different from the costs of practical problems; it is the dissatisfaction we feel because we don't understand something important to us.
We can express this cost as something more important that readers don't know, as another, larger question:
<ul style="list-style-type: none;">
<li>Administrators don't know why students underestimate the risks of 
binge drinking.
<span style="opacity:0.5;">So what?</span>
If they knew, they might figure out something more important: Would better information at orientation 
help students make safer decisions about drinking?
</li>
</ul>

As in this example, the larger question is about 
something readers do not know how to do. However, this larger question is related to a small question that you are struggling to answer.

### Stating the Solution
The solution is your main point or claim. To solve a practical problem, you must 
propose that the reader (or someone) do something to change a 
condition in the world:
<ul style="list-style-type: none;">
<li>... behavior that crosses the line from fun to recklessness that kills 
and injures not just drinkers but those around them.
<b>We may 
not be able to stop bingeing entirely, but we must try to con
trol its worst costs by educating students in how to manage its  
risks.</b>
</li>
</ul>

To solve a conceptual problem, you must 
state something you want readers to understand or believe:
<ul style="list-style-type: none;">
<li>... we can better understand not only the causes of this dangerous 
behavior but also the nature of risk-taking behavior in general.
<b>This study reports on our analysis of the beliefs of 300 first
year college students. We found that students were more likely 
to binge if they knew many stories of other students' bingeing, 
so that they believed that bingeing is far more common than it 
actually is.</b>
</li>
</ul>

## Guide 2: Conclusion
A good conclusion should bring together your point, its significance, and its implications for thinking further about your problem. There are other ways to conclude, when nothing better comes to mind, just reverse the order of your introduction:
<ol style="padding-left: 1em;">
<li><b>Open your conclusion by stating (or restating) your point, 
main claim, or solution to your problem:</b>
<ul style="list-style-type: none;">
<li> Though we can come at the problem of bingeing from several directions, the most important is education, especially in the first 
week of a student's college life. But that means each university 
must devote time and resources to it. </li>
</ul>
</li>
<li><b>Explain its significance by answering "So what"? in a new 
way, if you can. If you cannot, restate what you offered in 
the introduction, now as a benefit:</b>
<ul style="list-style-type: none;">
<li> If we do not start to control bingeing soon, many more students will die. </li>
<li> If we start to control bingeing now, we will save many lives. </li>
</ul>
</li>
<li><b>Suggest a further question or problem to be resolved, 
something still not known. Answer "Now what"?:</b>
<ul style="list-style-type: none;">
<li> Of course, even if we can control bingeing, the larger issue of risk
taking in general will remain a serious problem.</li>
</ul>
</li>
</ol>